---
title: 'Detour to the East'
author: 'Lev Manovich'
year: 1997
type: fulltext
---

# Detour to the East

After spending a week in Linz, Austria at Ars Electronica festival where incredible food displays at parties, sponsored by the city of Linz and the Austrian TV station ORF, together with very stylishly designed exhibition spaces and even more funky and futuristic looking computer terminals overshadowed whatever art was displayed on these terminals, my eyes are tired from glitter. I crave monotone landscapes, old surfaces, a world of textures, rather than information. So, I decided to take a detour in my trip and head East.

And now, on a sunny and cold September day I enter an old building in an Eastern European city I will choose not to name here — for a similar experience could have taken place in a dozen of other cities and countries. In my mind I am trying to compile a list of essential traits which, for me, sum up the uniqueness of the Eastern European cityscape. Men in sport cloves wearing gold chains behind the wheels of foreign-made cars, or talking in groups of two or three in front of private business. Middle-aged couples, also in sport cloves, shopping for food or carefully studying the awkwardly displayed merchandise in shop windows. (Why sport cloves are the fashionable attire in the East, something to wear for any occasion, from shopping to a Sunday walk in the park? Is it because people feel that life here, with all the difficulties, absurdities, the need for constant tactics and simply inhuman stamina, is best compared to some challenging sport, a marathon with obstacles? Or is it simply to protect themselves from the ever-present dirt?) But to continue with my traits: ever present displays of fine woman lingerie in shop windows (woman lingerie serving as the ultimate symbol of liberation, but also, like sport cloves, serving as a protective layer between a post-communist body and a dangerous, chaotic, primordial, unkempt, decayed and irrational post-communist environment; a way for a woman to retrieve into the privacy of her body, to claim it for herself, to create a border between her body and the environment outside — just as, in general, for decades people responded to the always present threat and aggression of politicized, uncontrollable and dirty public spaces of Communist life by retrieving into their apartments where they were finally in control, the apartments with parquet floors and carefully selected wallpaper, with numerous heavy volumes of classics on the bookshelves, with the shinning imported plastic seat in the bathroom — the pride of apartment's owners — with pictures of semi-naked girls carefully cut out from foreign magazines and attached to the bathroom door — a particular version of Communist comfort, suffered over, fought for, painstakingly assembled object by object over the course of many years). To continue with my traits, which, as it is becoming clear, all have to do with the contrast between private individuals and their environment, the contrast which does not exist in the same way in the West, or simply is not of the same magnitude: we also should include such typical sight as some woman or a couple, very stylish, impeccably dressed, waiting for a bus or a tram against the backdrop of completely decay, dirty, degenerated cityscape, with buildings looking as though they were not painted for at least 300 years or more; more correctly, looking like they were painstakingly painted by some set designers to appear as though were they not cared for many centuries (although Communist regime only lasted few decades). Indeed, the whole cityscape can be compared to one giant Brothers Quay set, only it is even more decayed, the degree of decay underlined by the elegance of city dwellers who try to lead their lives, have children, affairs, careers and so on in the middle of this surreal and cruel environment. And another trait: Coca-Cola signs everywhere, on every corner, covering whole kiosks or even whole buildings. Apparently, it is quicker to signal the beginning of new post-communist life by putting up such signs than to rename every Lenin street or Revolution Square. And another: a particular expression on people's faces and a way of behaving: very light melancholy, acceptance of fate, an air of uncertainty, certain shyness. Of course, men in sport cloves and gold chains are an acceptance — they do not look shy. And a few more traits which are not as crucial.

On entering the old building which houses the media department of an art school, I follow through a number of rooms, which, for my Western gaze, accustomed to clean geometry and bright colors, look like they were recently bombed. Boxes of papers lying around here and where, rusted pipes and all kinds of junk (not Western junk, rich in its heterogeneity and color schemes, but East European junk, heavy and monotonous like the environment itself); old television sets from the 1960s and some other hard to identify pieces of electronic equipment are piled up on the shelves in the short corridor leading to the bathrooms with no doors (I immediately recall how a friend of mine leaving in California in response to the inevitable question of why she left Russia responded that there was only one reason: she no longer could face Russian public bathrooms). But these rooms were not bombed; they are, I am explained, the working studios of the media department.

Finally, we enter the computer lab which looks somewhat less rusty, with a couple of Silicon Graphics computer workstations proudly blinking in the center. A serious-looking young man — a post-graduate student — demonstrates to me his Internet project. I experience a momentary jolt, a sudden and rather painful cut from one world to another — from the old, decayed, melancholic, gloomy but at the same time warm, comfortable and very human environment (and indeed, what can be more human than an East European interior space, populated by semi-broken objects which have witnessed generations of human dramas and, through the decades of use, have become almost human, like pets — an environment which welcomes and protects people, enveloping them in a particular psychological mist, like the background of a 17th-century Dutch painting displaying an interior scene) — into a universal electronic space: rows of directory listings; aggressively lined up icons with no national trait whatsoever; perfect tidiness of a desktop assaulting and challenging my gaze. I feel as though a warm cup of tea was suddenly taken from my lips; as though somebody blew off a candle and switched on a bare electric bulb instead; or as though I entered a small room of some airport hotel, discovering an anonymous space, naked metal surfaces, which, in contrast to the empty surfaces of on old Dutch still-lives which would bath me, caress me, warm me and comfort me — instead, these surfaces only reflect my body, through it back at me, leaving me alone with myself; they force me to be an anonymous passenger, reminding that I have to leave soon, leave this room, this building, this directory, this server — always in transit, always moving, never arriving; force me to become nothing but a solid body which, for a certain time only, will occupy an assigned seat on a plane (conforming a philosophical definition that an object is something which occupies a volume in space); or a packet of data traveling between servers, nothing more. Clean surfaces, of hotel rooms, airport lounges or of computer screens; in either case, forcing me always to leave, never to stay for a long time.

What is this computer space? It is the space where all the signs can be exchanged between each other, a space where everything is only a sign — in short, a space where marketplace became an ontology, where everything consists only from transactions (messages querying servers; records querying their databases; modems negotiating communication speed and the type of protocol to be used) and translations (between different media types, between different computer languages, between user input and the operating system), and where there is no place for atmosphere, mood or inefficiency. Now, as this computer space is becoming our space, the space of our lives, the space of our daily habitation — how can we bring into it at least a bit of an old Dutch painting into it, a bit of air, a bit of deliberation, of lingering on, the background of a painting whose sole function is to provide breathing space for the depicted objects, giving them dignity — but also to warm us, to give refuge to our eyes tired after taking in an elaborate cut of a lemon peel and shiny reflections on a silver glass; to be a mirror for our breath, an equivalent for these spaces in a conversation between good friends where no words are exchanged yet meaning is created?

I feel a little angry inside for being transferred to this cold computer space — but, out of politeness and solidarity, I carefully listen to student's explanations, sometimes interrupting him with questions. His English is not very good; I don't understand the details of the project, but I decide not to press it. The project has something to do with visualization of the users who log on remotely to the project's site; their Internet addresses are mapped into points making up a virtual object. Or something like that. I politely ask more questions and try to encourage the student.

What, I think to myself, this project has to do with the room we are both in, its particular post-socialist atmosphere of decay and neglect, its particular East European feeling of fog and mist, the decay which warms me like the background of a painting I was looking at in museum earlier this day? What does this project has to do with the city lying outside the window of a room we are in, the city which is desperately trying to join the West by dressing itself into Coca-Cola signs, by welcoming tourists and Mafia from every country, by keeping its bars and restaurants open all night so a tourist or a Mafia man will never feel thirsty or hungry? What does this project have to do with the city's past, its boulevards and neighborhoods, its Renaissance and Baroque facades, its golden squares and monuments, the castle high over the river? [1] What does this project, finally, has to do with the life of its young creator, his experience of growing up during the last decade of a Communist rule, the short excitement during the first years after its end, and then slowly growing disappointment that the new, like Coca-Cola signs amid the decayed city, remains surrounded by the old, the old which slowly eats it, poisons it, dissolves it, covers it with a patina of corruption, of broken friendships, destroyed hopes and dreams.

Why? Why this project could have been created in hundreds of other places on Earth? Only later did I understand. It is simple, and it has to do with a cultural function of the Internet outside of the U.S. and a few other highly developed regions. For the rest, the Internet function as an agent of modernization, just as other means of communication did before it — railroad, post, telephone, motor car, air travel, radio. Internet is a way for people to enter into a singular socio-linguistic space, defined by a certain Euro-English vocabulary and the names of stars, by a computer competency, by pop music. It is a way for people in different places to enter modernity — the space of homogeneity, of currency exchange shops, of Coca-Cola signs, or raves and club cloves, or CDs, of constant youth, itself the best symbol for movement and constant change, the symbol for leaving your roots and traditions behind — the space where everything can be converted into money signs, just like a computer can convert everything can into bits. 

And this is why we, in the West, should not expect culturally-specific Internet art, should not wait for Internet dialects, for some national schools of Net art. And this is why I can't possibly expect that this young man's project will reflect something of his unique identity, of his history, of his culture. This simply would be a contradiction in terms. To expect different countries to create their own national schools of Net art is the same as to expect them to create their own customized brands of Coca-Cola. The sole meaning of Coca-Cola, its sole function is that it is the same everywhere.

Net is an agent of modernization as well as a perfect metaphor for it. It is a post, a telephone, a motor car, plane travel, taken to the extreme. Thus, we should not be surprised that a typical Net art project, whether it is done in Seattle or Bucharest, in Berlin or in Odessa, is about communication itself, is about the Internet. Net art projects are materializations of social networks. These projects make the networks visible and create them at the same time — just as raves, party cloves and body piercing, CDs and names of music groups, of transnational companies, of products. It is a way for young people in Oslo and Warsaw, in Belgrade and Glasgow to enter modernity and to become its agents for the rest of a society. And just as it would be naive (although of course we can immediately recall or imagine some serious museum show on the image of a gas station in modern landscape painting, and even thick art historical or anthropological monographs on the subject) to take seriously "the art of a gas station," the category of "Net art" is a logical mistake. So-called Net art projects are simply visible manifestations of social, linguistic and psychological networks being created or at least made visible by these very projects, of people entering the space of modernity, the space where old cities pay the price for entering the global economy by Disney-fying themselves, where everybody is paying some price: exchanging person-to-person communication for virtual communication (telephone, fax, Internet); exchanging close groups for distributed virtual communities, which more often than not are like train stations, with everybody constantly coming and leaving, rather than the cozy cafes of the old avant-garde; exchanging decayed but warm interiors for shiny, bright but cold surfaces. In short, exchanging the light of a candle for a light of an electric bulb, with all the consequences this exchange involves.

I thank the student and leave the building. Outside, a couple tries to push a dead car; elaborate woman lingerie is displayed in a window of a small shop; few taxis wait for non-existent passengers. It is getting cold and I button my overcoat.

The following day I depart the city. The memory which remains with me is that of this young couple, both in stylish (according to local fashion) matching sport closes, pushing the dead car in the middle of a street on a Sunday morning. Besides the couple, the street is empty: the air is cold; and the edges of buildings are bathing in a crisp September light. The car does not roll; the couple laughs. Their faces display a mixture of determination and content, melancholy and shyness.

Two weeks later I am in another East European country, being driven to the city from the airport. As we enter city's outskirts, we pass a couple in sport cloves, standing next to the car with an open hood. Before they disappear out of site, I have time to notice the crooked lines of car's body, the dirty engine, maybe one or two details about woman's face. Is this the same couple I remember from the previous city? Did they moved here, hoping for better luck (according to the English newspaper I pick up on the plane, this country is doing somewhat better: Communists are implementing market reforms; Western tourism is on the rise; a new BMW dealership just opened in the old castle, while MacDonald is scheduled to open a flagship shop in the Opera building, which will certainly become city's magnet, the central gathering place for its youth; and there is even an ad for an Internet provider offering an ISDN line which only costs an equivalent of 2-year average salary). [2] But it can't be the same couple; they look much older, and so does their car. And this couple no longer laughs, their faces looking more content, more desperate. This couple will probably never use the Internet, but their children will — in the hope of escaping the decay, escaping becoming a middle age couple reclining over a hood of car which was not painted in a decade and looks like it was driven through Sahara desert.

Train, telephone, radio, music videos, party cloves, CDs and now the Internet — these are the tools of modernization, the tickets to entry the world with clean corners, the world consisting from uniform bright surfaces, the world as pristine and sharp as the individual pixels which make its images, the world where the dead cars are simply left to rot somewhere out of site, the world there only athletes wear sport cloves, and only during competitions. 

## Notes:

[1] The city where a visitor, had he an X-ray vision, would see in an early hour of a morning thousands of couples embracing in their beds, before they have to leave for work, thousands of woman's arms, thin and thick, white and occasionally tanned, all embracing the necks of men in a similar gesture; men cloves accurately hanging on a chair nearby or maybe inside a chest, a fork and a knife lying on a table past a loaf of bread gradually getting hard; thousands of couples which are of course similar to thousands of other couples in any other city of that size anywhere; yet also unique, for only here, in this city, women arms fold around the necks on their lovers in this particular way, and only here a knife and a fork lie on a table next to a loaf of bread at this particular angle.

[2] Later I learn that the city just decided to rename one of its central squares "Coca-Cola Classic" in recognition of the historical role which the Coca-Cola factory played during the civil war, when this factory protected by its workers was the only place of order in an otherwise chaotic city with no government. At that time, city leaders were given refuge inside the factory where, helped by a free supply of Coca-Cola, generously donated by factory management, they wrote a historical proclamation of independence and coordinated military action which eventually lead to city's liberation. [3]

[3] Unfortunately, the brave decision to rename the square which won the major much-needed support of the youth and pro-Western citizens could not save him from a resignation two weeks later after a local newspaper printed a rather revealing photograph depicting him in the middle of a sex orgy with 8 prostitutes. What angered the citizens was less the fact of an orgy — for, after all, it definitely was a proof of his health and virility and thus the ability to govern — but that the prostitutes were imported from a neighboring country. Don't we have enough of our own prostitutes, was angrily asking the editorial which accompanied the photograph? Rather than employing our own local woman (and he would not have to stop at 8), why is he spending limited city resources on import? After this argument, the resignation was inevitable. 

---