---
title: 'Filters, Plug-ins, and Menus - from Creation to Selection'
author: 'Lev Manovich'
year: 1998
type: fulltext
---

# Filters, Plug-ins, and Menus - from Creation to Selection

How can we creatively transform and extend the languages of older cultural forms in order to create new aesthetic models for digital media? Given that the digital tools which we use are themselves modeled after the production tools of the previous cultural era, do these tools actually work against us, pulling us into the past? What are the mechanisms by which the existing cultural norms and the older cultural languages are being encoded in the design of digital tools, becoming new cultural defaults? What are the ways in which these tools promote standardization, overriding our own creative intentions to impose their own ideology?

In my paper, I will propose some answers to these questions. My examples will come from a variety of areas, including the Web, virtual worlds, interactive multimedia, and interface design. My focus will be on the ways in which a particular cultural language of cinema is being encoded in the design of digital tools, including their defaults and interfaces. 

 \\#\# The Logic of the Menu

One example of the new cultural logic brought about by the digital tools is the switch from creation to selection. In digital culture authentic creation has been replaced by selection from a menu. I will analyze the historical origins of this new cultural logic and sketch a theoretical framework to understand the particular dynamics of standardization and creativity created by it.

E. H. Gombrich’s concept of a representational schema and Roland Barthes’ "death of the author" helped to sway us from the romantic ideal of the artist pulling images directly from the imagination. As Barthes puts it, "The Text is a tissue of quotations drawn from the innumerable centers of culture." Yet, even though a modern artist may be only reproducing or recombining preexisting texts and idioms, the actual material process of art-making nevertheless supports the romantic ideal. An artist operates like God creating the universe, starting with an empty canvas or a blank page and gradually filling in the details until finally bringing a new world into existence.

Such a process, manual and painstakingly slow, was appropriate for a preindustrial artisan culture. In the twentieth century, as mass production and automation gave rise to a "culture industry," art at first continued to insist on its artisanal model. Only in the 1910s, when artists began to assemble collages and montages from preexisting materials, was art introduced to the industrial mode of production.

In contrast, electronic art from its very beginning was based on a new principle: modification of an already existing signal. The first electronic musical instrument, designed in 1920 by the legendary Russian scientist and musician Leon Theremin, contained a generator producing a sine wave; the performer simply modified its frequency and amplitude. In the 1960s video artists began to build video synthesizers based on the same principle. No longer was the artist a romantic genius generating a new world out of his imagination. Turning a knob here, pressing a switch there, he became instead a technician, an accessory to the machine.

Replace the simple sine wave with a more complex signal, add a bank of signal generators, and you have the modern synthesizer, the first musical instrument to embody the logic of all new media: selection from a menu of choices. The first music synthesizers appeared in the 1950s, followed by video synthesizers in the 1960s, digital effects generators in the late 1970s, and in the 1980s computer software, such as MacDraw, that came with a repertoire of basic shapes. The process of art making has now become synchronized with the rest of modern society: everything is assembled from ready-made parts, from art objects to consumer products to people’s identities. The modern subject proceeds through life by selecting from menus and catalogs, whether assembling a wardrobe, decorating an apartment, choosing dishes at a restaurant, or joining an interest group. With electronic and digital media the creative act similarly entails selection from ready-made elements: textures and icons supplied by a paint program, 3-D models chosen from a modeling program, and melodies and rhythms built into a music program.

While previously the great text of culture from which the artist created a unique "tissue of quotations" was bubbling and simmering somewhere below consciousness, now it has become externalized and reduced to geometric objects, 3-D models, ready-made textures, and effects that are available as soon as the artist turns on the computer. The Web takes this process to the next level: it encourages the creation of texts that consist completely of pointers to other texts that are already on the Web. One does not have to add any original writing; it is enough to select from and rearrange what already exists.

The same logic applies to interactive art and media. It is often claimed that the user of an interactive work, by choosing a unique path through its elements, becomes its co-author, creating a new work. Yet if the complete work is the sum of all possible paths, what the user is actually doing is simply activating a preexisting part of the whole. As with the Web example, the user assembles a new menu, making an original selection from the total corpus available, rather than adding to it. This is a new type of creativity, which corresponds neither to the premodern idea of providing a minor modification to the tradition nor to the modern idea of a creator-genius revolting against it. It does, however, fit perfectly with the age of mass culture, where almost every practical act involves a process of selection from the given options.

The shift from creation to selection also applies to 3-D computer graphics, the main technique for building virtual sets and virtual worlds. The immense labor involved in originally constructing three-dimensional representations in a computer makes it hard to resist the temptation to utilize the preassembled, standardized objects, characters, and behaviors provided by software manufacturers — fractal landscapes, checkerboard floors, ready-made characters, and so on.10 Every program comes with libraries of ready-to-use models, effects, or even complete animations. For instance, a user of the typical high-end animation software can access preassembled animations of moving hair, rain, a comet’s tail, or smoke, with a single mouse click.

If even professional designers rely on ready-made objects and animations, the end users of virtual worlds on the Internet, who usually don’t have graphic or programming skills, have no other choice. Not surprisingly, Web virtual world providers from the beginning encouraged users to choose from the pictures, 3-D objects, and avatars that they supply. Quite soon we will see a market for detailed virtual sets, characters with programmable behaviors, and even complete scenarios (a bar with customers, a city square, a famous historical episode, etc.) from which a user can put together her or his own "unique" virtual world.

When the Kodak camera user was told, "You push the button, we do the rest," the freedom still existed to point the camera at anything. On the computer screen the slogan has become, "You push the button, we create your world." Before, the corporate imagination controlled the method of picturing reality; now, it prepackages the reality itself.

## Cinema as an Interface

"The logic of the menu" is a dramatic example of how digital tools bring to their logical conclusion certain tendencies which were already present in modern culture. But what was before a set of social practices, rituals and conventions now became encoded in the software itself. The result is a new form of control, soft but powerful. Although software does not directly prevent the users from creating from scratch, its design on every level makes it "natural" to follow a different logic: that of selection.

Along with encoding existing cultural norms in their design, digital tools also turn older cultural forms and languages into their defaults, making it difficult for the users to imagine the alternatives. In the rest of this paper, I will discuss this process by focusing on a particular cultural language — that of cinema. What are the ways in which the language of cinema is being encoded in digital tools and the very human-computer interface we are using? Rather than simply accepting this language as it, how can we creatively extend it to make the new media really new?

As new generations of both computer users and computer designers are growing up in a media-rich environment dominated by television rather than by printed texts, it is not surprising that they favor cinematic language over the language of print. As a result, cinematic elements are playing more and more central role in digital media. A hundred years after cinema's birth, cinematic ways of seeing the world, of structuring time, of narrating a story, of linking one experience to the next, are being extended to become the basic ways in which computer users access and interact with all data. In this way, the computer fulfills the promise of cinema as a visual Esperanto which pre-occupied many film artists and critics in the 1920s, from Griffith to Vertov. Indeed, millions of computer users communicate with each other through the same computer interface. And, in contrast to cinema where most of its "users" were able to "understand" cinematic language but not "speak" it (i.e., make films), all computer users can "speak" the language of the interface. They are active users of the interface, employing it to perform many tasks: send an email, run basic applications, organize files, and so on.

The original Esperanto never became truly popular. But software interfaces are widely used and are easily learned. We have a truly unprecedented situation in the history of cultural languages: something which is designed by a rather small group of people is immediately adopted by millions of computer users. How is it possible that people around the world adopt today something which a 20-something programmer in Northern California has hacked together just the night before? Shall we conclude that we are somehow biologically "wired" to the interface language, the way we are "wired," according to the original hypothesis of Noam Chomsky, to different natural languages?

Interestingly, the speed with which the language of software interfaces is formulated at the end of the twentieth century is comparable to the speed with which cinematic language was formulated exactly a hundred years ago. In both cases, the ease with which the users "acquired" these languages was to a large extent due to the fact that these languages drew on previous and already well-acquired cultural forms. In the case of cinema, it was theater, magic lantern shows, and other nineteenth-century forms of public entertainment. Software interfaces in their turn draw on older cultural forms such as cinema.

## Camera

I will begin with probably the most important case of cinema's influence on software interfaces — the mobile camera. Originally developed as part of 3-D computer graphics technology for such applications as computer-aided design, flight simulators, and computer movie making, during the 1980s and 1990s the camera model became as much of an interface convention as scrollable windows or cut and paste function. It became an accepted way for interacting with any data which is represented in three dimensions — which, in a computer culture, means literally anything and everything: the results of a physical simulation, an architectural site, design of a new molecule, financial data, the structure of a computer network and so on. As computer culture is gradually spatializing all representations and experiences, they become subjected to the camera's particular grammar of data access. Zoom, tilt, pan, and track: we now use these operations to interact with data spaces, models, objects, and bodies.

Abstracted from its historical temporary "imprisonment" within the physical body of a movie camera directed at physical reality, a virtualized camera also becomes an interface to all types of media besides 3-D space. As an example, consider the GUI (Graphical User Interface) of the leading computer animation software — PowerAnimator from Alias/Wavefront. In this interface, each window, regardless of whether it displays a 3-D model, a graph, or even plain text, contains Dolly, Track, and Zoom buttons. In this way, the model of a virtual camera is extended to apply to navigation through any kind of information, not only the one which was spatialized. It is particularly important that the user is expected to dolly and pan over text as though it is a 3-D scene. Cinematic vision triumphed over the print tradition, with the camera subsuming the page. The Guttenberg galaxy turned out to be just a subset of the Lumieres' universe.

## Frame

Another feature of cinematic perception which persists in software interfaces is a rectangular framing of represented reality. Cinema itself inherited this framing from Western painting. Since the Renaissance, the frame acted as a window into a larger space assumed to extend beyond the frame. This space was cut by the frame's rectangle into two parts: "onscreen space," the part which is inside the frame, and the part which is outside. In the famous formulation of Leon-Battista Alberti, the frame acted as a window onto the world. Or, in a more recent formulation of Jacques Aumont and his co-authors, "The onscreen space is habitually perceived as included within a more vast scenographic space. Even though the onscreen space is the only visible part, this larger scenographic part is nonetheless considered to exist around it."

Just as a rectangular frame of painting and photography presents a part of a larger space outside it, a window in HCI presents a partial view of a larger document. But if in painting (and later in photography), the framing chosen by an artist was final, computer interface benefits from a new invention introduced by cinema: the mobility of the frame. As a kino-eye moves around the space revealing its different regions, so can a computer user scroll through a window's contents.

It is not surprising to see that screen-based interactive 3-D environments, such as VRML words, also use cinema's rectangular framing since they rely on other elements of cinematic vision, specifically a mobile virtual camera. It may be more surprising to realize that Virtual Reality (VR) interface, often promoted as the most "natural" interface of all, utilizes the same framing. As in cinema, the world presented to a VR user is cut by a rectangular frame. As in cinema, this frame presents a partial view of a larger space. As in cinema, the virtual camera moves around to reveal different parts of this space.

Of course, the camera is now controlled by the user and, in fact, is identified with his/her own sight. Yet, it is crucial that in VR one is seeing the virtual world through a rectangular frame, and that this frame always presents only a part of a larger whole. This frame creates a distinct subjective experience which is much more close to cinematic perception than to unmediated sight.

Interactive virtual worlds, whether accessed through a screen-based or a VR interface, are often discussed as the logical successor to cinema, as potentially the key cultural form of the twenty-first century, just as cinema was the key cultural form of the twentieth century. These discussions usually focus on the issues of interaction and narrative. So, the typical scenario for twenty-first-century cinema involves a user represented as an avatar existing literally "inside" the narrative space, rendered with photorealistic 3-D computer graphics, interacting with virtual characters and perhaps other users, and affecting the course of narrative events.

It is an open question whether this and similar scenarios commonly invoked in new media discussions of the 1990s, indeed represent an extension of cinema or if they rather should be thought of as a continuation of some theatrical traditions, such as improvisational or avant-garde theater. But what undoubtedly can be observed in the 1990s is how virtual technology's dependence on cinema's mode of seeing and language is becoming progressively stronger. This coincides with the move from proprietary and expensive VR systems to more widely available and standardized technologies, such as VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling Language).

The creator of a VRML world can define a number of viewpoints which are loaded with the world. These viewpoints automatically appear in a special menu in a VRML browser which allows the user to step through them, one by one. Just as in cinema, ontology is coupled with epistemology: the world is designed to be viewed from particular points of view. The designer of a virtual world is thus a cinematographer as well as an architect. The user can wander around the world or she can save time by assuming the familiar position of a cinema viewer for whom the cinematographer has already chosen the best viewpoints.

Equally interesting is another option which controls how a VRML browser moves from one viewpoint to the next. By default, the virtual camera smoothly travels through space from the current viewpoint to the next as though on a dolly, its movement automatically calculated by the software. Selecting the "jump cuts" option makes it cut from one view to the next. Both modes are obviously derived from cinema. Both are more efficient than trying to explore the world on their own.

With a VRML interface, nature is firmly subsumed under culture. The eye is subordinated to the kino-eye. The body is subordinated to a virtual body of a virtual camera. While the user can investigate the world on her own, freely selecting trajectories and viewpoints, the interface privileges cinematic perception — cuts, pre-computed dolly-like smooth motions of a virtual camera, and pre-selected viewpoints.

## Point of View

The area of computer culture where cinema is being transformed into an interface most aggressively is computer games. By the 1990s, game designers have moved from two to three dimensions and had begun to incorporate cinematic language in an increasingly systematic fashion. Games started featuring lavish opening cinematic sequences (called in the game business "cinematics") to set the mood, establish the setting and introduce the narrative. Frequently, the whole game would be structured as an oscillation between interactive fragments requiring user's input and non-interactive cinematic sequences, i.e. "cinematics". As the decade progressed, game designers were creating increasingly complex — and increasingly cinematic — interactive virtual worlds. Regardless of a game's genre — action/adventure, fighting, flight simulator, first-person action, racing, or simulation — they came to rely on cinematography techniques borrowed from traditional cinema, including the expressive use of camera angles and depth of field, and dramatic lighting of 3-D sets to create mood and atmosphere. At the beginning of the decade, games used digital video of actors superimposed over 2-D or 3-D backgrounds, but by its end, they switched to fully synthetic characters. This switch also made virtual words more cinematic, as the characters could be better visually integrated with their environments.

A particularly important example of how computer games use — and extend — cinematic language, is their implementation of a dynamic point of view. In driving and flying simulators and in combat games, such as Tekken 2 (Namco, 1994 -), after a certain event takes place (car crashes, a fighter being knocked down), it is automatically replayed from a different point of view. Other games such as the Doom series (Id Software, 1993 -) and Dungeon Keeper (Bullfrog Productions, 1997) allow the user to switch between the point of view of the hero and a top-down "bird's eye" view. Finally, Nintendo went even further by dedicating four buttons on their N64 joypad to controlling the view of the action. While playing Nintendo games such as Super Mario 64 (Nintendo, 1996) the user can continuously adjust the position of the camera. Some Sony Playstation games such as Tomb Raider (Eidos, 1996) also use the buttons on the Playstation joypad for changing point of view.

The incorporation of virtual camera controls into the very hardware of game consoles is truly a historical event. Directing the virtual camera becomes as important as controlling the hero's actions. This is admitted by the game industry itself. For instance, a package for Dungeon Keeper lists four key features of the game, out of which the first two concern control over the camera: "switch your perspective," "rotate your view," "take on your friend," "unveil hidden levels". In games such as this one, cinematic perception functions as the subject in its own right. Here, the computer games are returning to "The New Vision" movement of the 1920s (Moholy-Nagy, Rodchenko, Vertov, and others), which foregrounded new mobility of a photo and film camera, and made unconventional points of view the key part of their poetics. 

## Automating Culture

The fact that computer games continue to encode, step by step, the grammar of a kino-eye in software and in hardware is not an accident. This encoding is consistent with the overall trajectory driving the computerization of culture since the 1940s, that being the automation of all cultural operations. This automation gradually moves from basic to more complex operations: from image processing and spell checking to software-generated characters, 3-D worlds, and Web Sites. The side effect of this automation is that once particular cultural codes are implemented in low-level software and hardware, they are no longer seen as choices but as unquestionable defaults. To take the automation of imaging as an example, in the early 1960s the newly emerging field of computer graphics incorporated a linear one-point perspective in 3-D software, and later directly in hardware. As a result, linear perspective became the default mode of vision in digital culture, be it computer animation, computer games, visualization, or VRML worlds. Now we are witnessing the next stage of this process: the translation of cinematic grammar of points of view into software and hardware. As Hollywood cinematography is translated into algorithms and computer chips, its convention becomes the default method of interacting with any data subjected to spatialization, with a narrative, and with other human beings. (At SIGGRAPH '97 in Los Angeles, one of the presenters called for the incorporation of Hollywood-style editing in multi-user virtual worlds software. In such implementation, user interaction with other avatar(s) will be automatically rendered using classical Hollywood conventions for filming dialog.) Element by element, cinema is being poured into a computer: first one-point linear perspective; next the mobile camera and a rectangular window; next cinematography and editing conventions, and, of course, digital personas also based on acting conventions borrowed from cinema, to be followed by make-up, set design, and, of course, the narrative structures themselves. From one cultural language among others, cinema is becoming the cultural interface, a toolbox for all cultural communication, overtaking the printed word.

Cinema, the major cultural form of the twentieth century, has found a new life as the toolbox of a computer user. What was an individual artistic vision — of Griffith, Eisenstein, Gance, Vertov — has become a way of work and a way of life for millions in the computer age. Cinema's aesthetic strategies have become basic organizational principles of computer software. The window in a fictional world of a cinematic narrative has become a window in a datascape. In short, what was cinema has become human-computer interface.

## Resisting the Defaults

I will conclude my paper by discussing a few artistic projects which, in different ways, offer alternatives to this trajectory. To summarize it once again, the trajectory involves gradual translation of elements and techniques of cinematic perception and language into a decontextualized set of tools to be used as an interface to any data. In the process of this translation, cinematic perception is divorced from its original material embodiment (camera, film stock), as well as from the historical contexts of its formation. If in cinema the camera functioned as a material object, co-existing, spatially and temporally, with the world it was showing us, it has now become a set of abstract operations. The art projects described below refuse this separation of cinematic vision from the material world. They reunite perception and material reality by making the camera and what it records a part of a virtual world's ontology. They also refuse the universalization of cinematic vision by computer culture, which (just as post-modern visual culture in general) treats cinema as a toolbox, a set of "filters" which can be used to process any input. In contrast, each of these projects employs a unique cinematic strategy which has a specific relation to the particular virtual world it reveals to the user.

In my own project Reality Generator (1996 — ongoing) I directly make points of view a part of the ontology of a virtual world. The world is described as a set of objects and a set of viewpoints attached to different points in space. Some viewpoints are simply XYZ coordinates which do not correspond to anything in particular. Other viewpoints are attached to particular objects: a leaf, a bottle in the ground, a cloud. In this way, every object also becomes the subject, the focalizer of the narrative. Everything can be seen from any position. Modernist techniques of switching between narrators in different parts of the story and re-telling the same events from different points of view are combined with computer's combinatory logic.

In The Invisible Shape of Things Past Joachim Sauter and Dirk Lüsenbrink of the Berlin-based Art+Com collective created a truly innovative cultural interface for accessing historical data about Berlin's history. The interface de-virtualizes cinema, so to speak, by placing the records of cinematic vision back into their historical and material context. As the user navigates through a 3-D model of Berlin, he or she comes across elongated shapes lying on city streets. These shapes, which the authors call "film objects", correspond to documentary footage recorded at the corresponding points in the city. To create each shape the original footage is digitized and the frames are stacked one after another in-depth, with the original camera parameters determining the exact shape. The user can view the footage by clicking on the first frame. As the frames are displayed one after another, the shape is getting correspondingly thinner.

In following with the already noted general trend of computer culture towards spatialization of every cultural experience, this cultural interface spatializes time, representing it as a shape in a 3-D space. This shape can be thought of as a book, with individual frames stacked one after another as book pages. The trajectory through time and space taken by a camera becomes a book to be read, page by page. The records of camera's vision become material objects, sharing the space with the material reality which gave rise to this vision. Cinema is solidified. This project, then, can be also understood as a virtual monument to cinema. The (virtual) shapes situated around the (virtual) city, remind us about the era when cinema was the defining form of cultural expression — as opposed to a toolbox for data retrieval and use, as it is becoming today in a computer. 

Hungarian-born artist Tamás Waliczky openly refuses the default mode of vision imposed by computer software, that of the one-point linear perspective. Each of his computer animated films The Garden (1992), The Forest (1993), and The Way (1994) utilizes a particular perspectival system: a water-drop perspective in The Garden, a cylindrical perspective in The Forest, and a reverse perspective in The Way. Working with computer programmers, the artist created custom-made 3-D software to implement these perspectival systems. Each of the systems has an inherent relationship to the subject of a film in which it is used. In The Garden, its subject is the perspective of a small child, for whom the world does not yet have an objective existence. In The Forest, the mental trauma of emigration is transformed into the endless roaming of a camera through the forest which is actually just a set of transparent cylinders. Finally, in The Way, the self-sufficiency and isolation of a Western subject from his/her environment are conveyed by the use of a reverse perspective.

In Waliczky's films, the camera and the world are made into a single whole, whereas in The Invisible Shape of Things Past the records of the camera are placed back into the world. Rather than simply subjecting his virtual worlds to different types of perspectival projection, Waliczky modified the spatial structure of the worlds themselves. In The Garden, a child playing in a garden becomes the center of the world; as he moves around, the actual geometry of all the objects around him is transformed, with objects getting bigger as he gets close to him. To create The Forest, a number of cylinders were placed inside each other, each cylinder mapped with a picture of a tree, repeated a number of times. In the film, we see a camera moving through this endless static forest in a complex spatial trajectory — but this is an illusion. In reality, the camera does move, but the architecture of the world is constantly changing as well, because each cylinder is rotating at its own speed. As a result, the world and its perception are fused together.

The work of artists such as Waliczky demonstrates that it possible to transcend the defaults of digital tools and to transform older cultural forms into a new language. But this can only be done if we are aware of these defaults and if we understand mechanisms by which particular cultural norms and preferences become encoded in the design of the tools. I hope that this paper can contribute to this.

## References:

[1] E.H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960); Roland Barthes, "The Death of the Author," in Image, Music, Text, ed. Stephen Heath (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977).

[2] Barthes, 142. 

[3] Bulat Galeyev, Soviet Faust. Lev Theremin — Pioneer Of Electronic Art (in Russian) (Kazan, 1995), 19.

[4] See [http://www.aw.sgi.com/pages/home/pages/products/pages/poweranimator\_film\_sgi/index.html](http://www.aw.sgi.com/pages/home/pages/products/pages/poweranimator_film_sgi/index.html), accessed December 1, 1997.

[5] Jacques Aumont et al., Aesthetics of Film (Austin: Texas University Press, 1992), 13. 

[6] By VR interface I mean the common forms of a head-mounted or head-coupled directed display employed in VR systems. For a popular review of such displays written when the popularity of VR was at its peak, see Steve Aukstakalnis and David Blatner, Silicon Mirage: The Art and Science of Virtual Reality (Berkeley: CA: Peachpit Press, 1992), pp. 80-98. For a more technical treatment, see Dean Kocian and Lee Task, "Visually Coupled Systems Hardware and the Human Interface" in Virtual Environments and Advanced Interface Design, edited by Woodrow Barfield and Thomas Furness III (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), 175-257. 

[7] See Kocian and Task for details on field of view of various VR displays. Although it varies widely between different systems, the typical size of the field of view in commercial head-mounted displays (HMD) available in the first part of the 1990s was 30-50o.

[8] The following examples refer to a particular VRML browser — WebSpace Navigator 1.1 from Silicon Graphics, Inc. Other browsers have similar features. [http://www.webspace.sgi.com/WebSpace/Help/1.1/index.html](http://www.webspace.sgi.com/WebSpace/Help/1.1/index.html), accessed December 1, 1997.

[9] See John Hartman and Josie Wernecke, The VRML 2.0 Handbook: Building Moving Worlds on the Web (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1996), 363.

[10] For a more detailed analysis of this narrative structure, see my article, "The Aesthetics of Virtual Worlds: Report from Los Angeles," in CTHEORY [http://www.ctheory.com](http://www.ctheory.com).

[11] Examples of an earlier trend are Return to Zork (Activision, 1993) and The 7th Guest (Trilobyte/Virgin Games, 1993). Examples of the later trend are Soulblade (Namco, 1997) and Tomb Raider (Eidos, 1996). 

[12] Critical literature on computer games, and in particular on their language, remains very slim. Useful facts on history of computer games, descriptions of different genres, and the interviews with the designers can be found in Chris McGowan and Jim McCullaugh, Entertainment in the Cyber Zone (New York: Random House, 1995). Another useful source is J.C. Herz, Joystick Nation: How Videogames Ate Our Quarters, Won Our Hearts, and Rewired Our Minds (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1997).

[13] Dungeon Keeper, MS-DOS/Windows 95 CD-ROM (Bullfrog Productions, 1997). 

[14] For a more detailed discussion of the history of computer imaging as gradual automation, see my articles "Mapping Space: Perspective, Radar and Computer Graphics," in SIGGRAPH '93 Visual Proceedings, edited by Thomas Linehan, 143-147 (New York: ACM, 1993); and "Automation of Sight from Photography to Computer Vision," in Electronic Culture: Technology and Visual Representation, edited by Timothy Druckery and Michael Sand (New York: Aperture, 1996).

[15] Moses Ma's presentation, panel on "Putting a Human Face on Cyberspace: Designing Avatars and the Virtual Worlds They Live In," SIGGRAPH '97, August 7, 1997. 

[16] On the concept of focalization in narrative theory, see Mieke Bal, Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985). 

[17] See [http://www.artcom.de/projects/invisible\_shape/welcome.en](http://www.artcom.de/projects/invisible_shape/welcome.en), accessed December 1, 1997.

---