---
title: 'Import/Export: Design Workflow and Contemporary Aesthetics'
author: 'Lev Manovich'
year: 2006
type: fulltext
---

# Import/Export: Design Workflow and Contemporary Aesthetics

Until the arrival of the software-based tools in the 1990s, to combine different types of time-based media together was either time consuming, or expensive, or in some cases simply impossible. Software tools such as Illustrator, Photoshop and After Effects have changed this situation in a fundamental way. Now a designer can import different media into her composition with just a few mouse clicks.

However, the contemporary software-based visual design does not simply involve combining elements from different sources within a single application. In this article we will look at the whole workflow typical of contemporary visual design (graphic design, web design. and motion graphics) and its effects on contemporary aesthetics. 

Although ”import”/”export” commands appear in most modern media authoring and editing software running under GUI, at first sight they do not seem to be very important for understanding software culture. When you “import,” you are not authoring new media or modifying media objects or accessing information across the globe, as in web browsing. All these two commands allow you to do is to move data around between different applications. In other words, they make data created in one application compatible with other applications. And that does not look so glamorous.

Think again. What is the largest part of the economy of greater Los Angeles area? It is not entertainment. (From movie production to museums and everything is between only accounts for 15%). It turns out that the largest part of the economy is import/export business - more than 60%. More generally, one commonly evoked characteristic of globalization is greater connectivity – places, systems, countries, organizations etc. becoming connected in more and more ways. And connectivity can only happen if you have certain level of compatibility: between business codes and procedures, between shipping technologies, between network protocols, between computer file formats, and so on. 

Let us take a closer look at import/export commands. As I will try to show below, these commands play a crucial role in software culture, and in particular in media design – regardless of what kind of project a design is working on.

Before they adopted software tools in the 1990s, graphic designers, filmmakers, and animators used completely different technologies. Therefore, as much as they were influenced by each other or shared the same aesthetic sensibilities, they inevitably created differently looking images. Filmmakers used camera and film technology designed to capture three-dimensional physical reality. Graphic designers were working with offset printing and lithography. Animators were working with their own technologies: transparent cells and an animation stand with a stationary film camera capable of making exposures one frame at a time as the animator changed cells and/or moved background. 

As a result, twentieth century cinema, graphic design, and animation (I am talking here about standard animation techniques used by most commercial studios) developed distinct artistic languages and vocabularies both in terms of form and content. For example, graphic designers worked with a two-dimensional space, film directors arranged compositions in three-dimensional space, and cell animators worked with a “two-and-a-half” dimensions. This holds for the overwhelming majority of works produced in each field, although of course exceptions do exist. For instance, Oscar Fischinger made one abstract film that consisted of  simple geometric objects moving in an empty space – but as far as I know, this is the only film in the whole history of abstract animation, which is taking place in three-dimensional space. 

The differences in technology influenced what kind of content would appear in different media. Cinema showed “photorealistic” images of nature, built environments and human forms articulated by special lighting. Graphic designs featured typography, abstract graphic elements, monochrome backgrounds and cutout photographs. And cartoons showed hand-drawn flat characters and objects animated over hand-drawn but more detailed backgrounds. The exceptions are rare. For instance, while architectural spaces frequently appear in films because directors could explore their three-dimensionality in staging scenes, they practically never appear in animated films in any detail – until animation studios start using 3D computer animation.

Why was it so difficult to cross boundaries? For instance, in theory one could imagine making an animated film in the following way: printing a series of slightly different graphics designs and then filming them as though they were a sequence of animated cells. Or a film where a designer simply made a series of hand drawings that used the exact vocabulary of graphic design and then filmed them one by one. And yet, to the best of my knowledge, such a film was never made. What we find instead are many abstract animated films that have certain connection to various styles of abstract painting. For example, Oscar Fischinger’s films and paintings share certain forms. We can also find abstract films and animated commercials and movie titles that have certain connection to graphic design aesthetics popular around the same times. For instance, some moving image sequences made by motion graphics pioneer Pablo Ferro around 1960s display psychedelic aesthetics which can be also found in posters, record covers, and other works of graphic design in the same period. 

And yet, despite these connections, works in different media never used exactly the same visual language. One reason is that projected film could not adequately show the subtle differences between typeface sizes, line widths, and grayscale tones crucial for modern graphic design. Therefore, when the artists were working on abstract art films or commercials that adopted design aesthetics (and most major 20th abstract animators worked both on their own films and commercials), they could not simply expand the language of a printed page into time dimension. They had to invent essentially a parallel visual language that used bold contrasts, more easily readable forms, and thick lines – which, because of their thickness, were in fact no longer lines but shapes. 

Although the limitations in resolution and contrast of film and television image in comparison to a printed page contributed to the distance between the languages used by abstract filmmakers and graphic designers for the most of the twentieth century, ultimately I do not think it was the decisive factor. Today the resolution, contrast and color reproduction between print, computer screens, television screens, and the screens of mobile phones are also substantially different – and yet we often see exactly the same visual strategies deployed across these different display media. If you want to be convinced, leaf through any book or a magazine on contemporary 2D design (i.e., graphic design for print, broadcast, and the web). When you look at pages featuring the works of a particular designer or a design studio, in most cases it’s impossible to identify the origins of the images unless you read the captions. Only then do you find that which image is a poster, which one is a still from a music video, and which one is magazine editorial. 

I am going to use Taschen’s _Graphic Design for the 21st Century: 100 of the World’s Best Graphic Designers_ (2001) for examples. Peter Anderson’s design showing a line of type against a cloud of hundreds of little letters in various orientations turns out to be the frames from the title sequence for Channel Four documentary. His other design which similarly plays on the contrast between jumping letters in a larger font against irregularly cut planes made from densely packed letters in much smaller fonts turns to be a spread from IT Magazine. Since the first design was made for broadcast while the second was made for print, we would expect that the first design would employ bolder forms - however, both designs use the same scale between big and small fonts, and feature texture fields composed from hundreds of words in such a small font that they clear need to be read. A few pages later we encounter a design by Philippe Apeloig that uses exactly the same technique and aesthetics as Anderson. In this case, tiny lines of text positioned at different angles form a 3D shape floating in space. On the next page another design by Apeloig creates a field in perspective - made not from letters but from hundreds of identical abstract shapes.

These design rely on software’s ability (or on the designer being influenced by software use and recreating what she did with software manually) to treat text as any graphical primitive and to easily create compositions made from hundreds of similar or identical elements positioned according to some pattern. And since an algorithm can easily modify each element in the pattern, changing its position, size, color, etc., instead of the completely regular grids of modernism we see more complex structures that are made from many variations of the same element. (This strategy is explored particularly imaginatively in Zaha Hadid’s designs such as Louis Vuitton Icone Bag, 2006, and in urban masterplans for Singapore and Turkey which use what Hadid calls a “variable grid.”)

Each designer included in the book was asked to provide a brief statement to accompany the portfolio of their work, and Lust studio has put this phrase as their motto: “Form-follows-process.” So, what is the nature of design process in the software age and how does it influence the forms we see today around us?

If you are practically involved in design or art today, you already know that contemporary designers use the same small set of software tools to design just about everything: InDesign, Dreamweaver, Photoshop, Illustrator, Flash, Premiere, After Effects, Maya. However, the crucial factor is not the tools themselves but the workflow process, enabled by “import” and “export” operations and related methods (“place,” “insert object,” “subscribe,” “smart object,” etc.), which ensure coordination between these tools.

When a particular media project is being put together, the software used at the final stage depends on the type of output media and the nature of the project – After Effects for motion graphics projects and video compositing, Illustrator or Freehand for print illustrations, InDesign for graphic design, Flash for interactive interfaces and web animations, 3ds Max or Maya for 3D computer models and animations, and so on. But these programs are rarely used alone to create a media design from start to finish. Typically, a designer may create elements in one program, import them into another program, add elements created in yet another program, and so on. This happens regardless of whether the final product is an illustration for print, a web site, or a motion graphics sequence; whether it is a still or a moving image, interactive or non-interactive, etc.

The very names which software companies give to the products for media design and production refer to this defining characteristic of software-based design process. Since 2005, Adobe has been selling its different media authoring applications bundled together into “Adobe Creative Suite.” Among the subheadings and phrases used to accompany this band name, one in particular is highly meaningful in the context of our discussion: “Design Across Media.” This phrase accurately describes both the capabilities of the applications collected in a suite, and their actual use in the real world. Each of the key applications collected in the suite – Photoshop, Illustrator, InDesign, Flash, Dreamweaver, After Effects, Premiere – has many special features geared for producing a design for particular output media. Illustrator is set up to work with professional-quality printers; After Effects and Premiere can output video files in a variety of standard video formats such as HDTV; Dreamweaver supports programming and scripting languages to enable creation of sophisticated and large-scale dynamic web sites. But while a design project is finished in one of these applications, most other applications in Adobe Creative Suite will be used in the process to create and edit its various elements. Thus is one of the ways in which Adobe Creative Suite enables “design across media.” The compatibility between applications also means that the elements (called in professional language “assets”) can be later re-used in new projects. For instance, a photograph edited in Photoshop can be first used in a magazine ad and later put in a video, a web site, etc. Or the 3D models and characters created for a feature film are reused for a video game based on the film. This ability to re-use the same design elements for very different projects types is very important because of the widespread practice in creative industries to create products across the range of media which share the same images, designs, characters, narratives, etc. An advertising campaign often works “across media” including web ads, TV ads, magazine ads, billboards, etc. And if turning movies into games and games into movies has been already popular in Hollywood for a while, a new trend since approximately middle of 2000s is to create a movie, a game, a web site or maybe other media products at the same time – and have all the products use the same digital assets both for economic reasons and to assure aesthetic continuity between these products. Thus, a studio may create 3D backgrounds and characters and put them both in a movie and in a game, which will be released simultaneously. If media authoring applications were not compatible, such practice would simply not be possible. 

All these examples illustrate the intentional reuse of design elements “across media.” However, the compatibility between media authoring applications also has a much broader and non-intentional effect on contemporary aesthetics. Given the production workflow I just described, we may expect that the same visual techniques and strategies will also appear in all types of media projects designed with software without this being consciously planned for. We may also expect that this will happen on a much more basic level. This is indeed the case. _The same software-enabled design strategies, the same software-based techniques and the same software-generated iconography are now found across all types of media, all scales, and all kinds of projects_. 

We have already encountered a few concrete examples. For instance, the three designs by Peter Anderson and Philippe Apeloig done for different media use the same basic computer graphic technique: automatic generation of a repeating pattern while varying the parameters which control the appearance of each element making up the pattern’s element – its size, position, orientation, curvature, etc. (The general principle behind this technique can also be used to generate 3D models, animations, textures, make plants and landscapes, etc. It is often referred to as “parametric design,” or “parametric modeling.”) The same technique is also used by Hadid’s studio for Louis Vuitton Icone Bag. In another example, which will be discussed below, Gregg Lynn used particle systems technique – which at that time was normally used to simulate fire, snow, waterfalls, and other natural phenomena in cinema – to generate the forms of a building. 

To use the biological metaphor, we can say that compatibility between design applications creates very favorable conditions for the propagation of media DNAs between species, families, and classes. And this propagation happens on all levels: the whole design, parts of a design, the elements making up the parts, and the “atoms” which make up the elements. Consider the following hypothetical example of propagation on a lower level. A designer can use Illustrator to create a 2D smooth curve (called in computer graphics field called a “spline.”) This curve becomes a building block that can be used in any project. It can form a part of an illustration or a book design. It can be imported into animation program where it can be set to motion or imported into 3D program where it can be extruded in 3D space to define a solid object. 

Over time software manufacturers worked to developed tighter ways of connecting their applications to make moving elements from one to another progressively easier and more useable. Over the years, it became possible to move a complex project between applications without losing anything (or almost anything). For example, in describing the integration between Illustrator CS3 and Photoshop CS3, Adobe’s web site states that a designer can “Preserve layers, layer comps, transparency, editable files when moving files between Photoshop and Illustrator.” [1] Another important development has been the concept that Microsoft Office calls “linked objects.” If you link all of a part of one file to another file (for instance, linking an excel document to a PowerPoint presentation), any time information changes in the first file, it automatically gets updated in the second file. Many media applications implement this feature. To use the same example of Illustrator CS3, a designer can “Import Illustrator files into Adobe Premiere Pro software, and then use Edit Original command to open the artwork in Illustrator, edit it, and see your changes automatically incorporated into your video project.” [2]

Each of the type of programs used by media designers – 3D graphics, vector drawing, image editing, animation, compositing – excel at particular design operations, i.e., particular ways of creating design elements or modifying already existing elements. These operations can be compared to the different types of blocks of a Lego set. You can create an infinite number of projects by just using the limited number of block types provided in the set. Depending on the project, these block types will play different functions and appear in different combinations. For example, a rectangular red block may become a part of the tabletop, a part of the head of a robot, etc.

Design workflow that uses a small number of compatible software programs works in a similar way – with one important difference. The building blocks used in contemporary design are not only different kinds of visual elements one can create – vector patterns, 3D objects, particle systems, etc. – but also _various ways of modifying these elements_: blur, skew, vectorize, change transparency level, spherisize, extrude, etc. This difference is crucial. If media creation and editing software did not include these and many other modification operations, we would have seen an altogether different visual language at work today. We would have seen “multimedia,” i.e., designs that simply combine elements from different media. Instead, we see “deep remixability” – the “deep” interactions between working methods and techniques of different media within a single project. 

In a “cross-over” use, the techniques which were previously specific in one media are applied to other media types (for example, a lens blur filter). This often can be done within a single application – for instance, applying After Effects’s blur filter to a composition which can contain graphic elements, video, 3D objects, etc. However, being able to move a whole project or its elements between applications opens many more possibilities because each application offers many unique techniques not available in other applications. As the media data travels from one application to the next, is being transformed and enhanced using the operations offered by each application. For example, a designer can take her project she has been editing in Adobe Premiere and import in After Effects where she can use advanced compositing features of this program. She can then import the result back into Premiere and continue editing. Or she can create artwork in Photoshop or Illustrator and import into Flash where it can be animated. This animation can be then imported into a video editing program and combined with video. A spline created in Illustrator becomes a basis for a 3D shape. And so on. 

The production workflow specific to the software era that I just illustrated has two major consequences. Its first result is the visual aesthetics of hybridity that dominates contemporary design universe. The second is the use of the same techniques and strategies across this universe - regardless of the output media and type of project. 

As I already stated more than once, a typical design today combines techniques coming from multiple media. We now in a better position to understand why this is the case. As a designer works on a project, she combines the results of the operations specific to different software programs that were originally created to imitate work with different physical media (Illustrator was created to make illustrations, Photoshop - to edit digitized photographs, Premiere – to edit video, etc.). While these operations continue to be used in relation to their original media, most of them are now also used as part of the workflow on any design job. 

The essential condition that enables this new design logic and the resulting aesthetics is compatibility between files generated by different programs. In other words, “import,” “export” and related functions and commands of graphics, animation, video editing, compositing, and modeling software are historically more important than the individual operations these programs offer. The ability to combine raster and vector layers within the same image, to place 3D elements into a 2D composition and vice versa, and so on is what enables the production workflow with its reuse of the same techniques, effects, and iconography across different media.

The consequences of this compatibility between software and file formats, which was gradually achieved during the 1990s, are hard to overestimate. Besides the hybridity of modern visual aesthetics and reappearance of exactly the same design techniques across all output media, there are also other effects. For instance, the whole field of motion graphics as it exists today came into existence to a large extent because of the integration between vector drawing software, specifically Illustrator, and animation/compositing software such as After Effects. A designer typically defines various composition elements in Illustrator and then imports them into After Effects where they are animated. This compatibility did not exist when the initial versions of different media authoring and editing software initially became available in the 1980s. It was gradually added in particular software releases. But when it was achieved around the middle of the 1990s [3], within a few years the whole language of contemporary graphical design was fully imported into the moving image area – both literally and metaphorically. 

In summary, the compatibility between graphic design, illustration, animation, video editing, 3D modeling and animation, and visual effects software plays the key role in shaping visual and spatial forms of the software age. On the one hand, never before have we witnessed such a variety of forms as today. On the other hand, exactly the same techniques, compositions and iconography can now appear in any media. 

## References:

[1] [http://www.adobe.com/products/illustrator/features/allfeatures/](http://www.adobe.com/products/illustrator/features/allfeatures/), accessed August 30, 2008.

[2] Ibid.

[3] In 1995, After Effects 3.0 enabled Illustrator import and Photoshop as comp import. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobe\_After\_Effects](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobe_After_Effects), accessed August 28, 2008.

---