---
title: 'Introduction to Info-Aesthetics'
author: 'Lev Manovich'
year: 2005
type: fulltext
---

# Introduction to Info-Aesthetics

To explain what I mean by _info-aesthetics_, let me start by noting something simple but nevertheless quite significant: the word “information” contains within it the word “form”. For a while now social theorists, economists, and politicians were telling us that we are living in a new “information society.” The term was first used already in the 1960s, even before computer revolution got underway. I will discuss in some detail the theories of information society as well as relayed concepts of post-industrial society, knowledge society, and network society – but I want to do this later. Since this book is about the culture of information society, what is important for me –as much as the arguments of economists and sociologists – are the changes in people’s everyday lives. What we do, what objects we use, how we communicate and interact with others and the kind of spaces where we dwell in or pass though - all this is bound to change exciting cultural patterns and aesthetic preferences as well as create new ones. So, if we can observe significant changes in all these dimensions of everyday human experience that are converging around “information,” this by itself is sufficient to justify going out to look at corresponding cultural responses. 

When the term “information society” was first introduced in the 1960s, most people even in America never saw a computer. (In my own case, having grown up in Moscow in the 1970s, I only came face to face with a working computer after I came to New York in 1981.) Of course, a few perceptive artists such as Jean-Luc Godard in his brilliant _Alphaville_ (1965) have already understood that a computer was becoming a new God of our times – but they were exceptions. Even such a visionary as Marshall McLuhan who seems to precisely predict most features of contemporary cyber-culture about three decades before they came into existence, has ignored computers. In _Understanding Media_ (1964), which presents a systematic analysis of all key historical and modern media technologies, McLuhan does devote the very last section to data processing, but in general computation plays no role in his theories. This is so probably because McLuhan was thinking of media as means of communication and/or representation – and in the 1960s computers were not yet involved in any of these functions in a way that would be visible to the public. 

If in the 1960s only a very small number of computer scientists – Joseph Licklider, Douglas Engelbart, Ted Nelson, Alan Kay, and a handful of others – understood that computer was bound to become an _engine of culture_ rather than being only a data processing machine, similarly only a few social scientists were able to perceive that dealing with information was replacing in importance industrial manufacturing. Today, however, what was once an academic hypothesis has become an everyday reality that can be easily observed by the majority of citizens leaving in the developed as well as developing countries. All kinds of work are reduced to manipulating data on one’s computer screen – in short, processing information. As you walk or drive past office buildings in any city, all offices regardless of what a company does look the same: rows of computer screens and keyboards. Regardless of their actual profession, financial analysts, city officials, secretaries, architects, accountants, and pretty much everybody else engaged in white-collar work are doing the same thing: processing information. And when we leave work, we don’t leave information society. In our everyday life, we use search engines; we retrieve data from databases; we rely on “personal information appliances” and “personal information managers.” We complain that there is too much information to keep track or make sense of – while the libraries and museums around the world constantly add to the global information pile by systematically digitizing everything they got. We turn our own lives into an information archive by storing all our emails, chats, SMS, digital photos, GPS tracks, favorite music tracks, favorite television shows, and other “digital traces” of our existence. One day we get tired from all this, so we start planning to take “e-mail free” holidays – but even this requires information work: searching for best deals on the internet, comparing fares, inputting credit card information into a reservation web site. And even on a most activity-free vacation, the moment we open a cell phone to make call or check messages, we enter the world of information. In short, “information society” is where most citizens of the developed and developing world live today, experiencing it in their everyday practice. (And while those living outside this world themselves are not using computers on a daily basis, the companies, NGOs and governments of the developed countries, which play the decisive role in deciding what happens to developing countries, are all of course computerized. Therefore, information processing shapes the lives and fates of citizens of these countries although they themselves may not experience it directly.)

Information processing has become the key dimension of our daily lives – but since we are physical beings, we have always required and continue to require various physical forms in order to house and transport our bodies, our information processing machines and information itself. These forms range from very big (buildings, bridges, airplanes) to very small (iPod, mobile phone), from rarely changing (architecture) to periodically updatable (clothes). If a person needs clothing, a computer needs a case to protect its insides and to allow us to enter and manipulate information in a convenient way (i.e., a human-computer interface – which is typically a keyboard and a screen). Text needs to be displayed in some way for us to be able to read it, be it a screen, paper or e-paper. [1]

In short, we need to design forms for ourselves – and also for information that we create, record, and manipulate. We may have become information-processing species, but we also remain to be form-creating species as well. If for Marx humans separated themselves from other species when they designed first tools for work, we can add that humans became humans by becoming _designers_ – the inventors and makers of forms. 

If information processing is the new defining characteristic of our world, what is then the effect of this on the forms we design today? This is the question that I have been interested in after finishing my previous book _The Language of New Media_ in 1999. While _Info-Aesthetics_ offers a discussion of multiple ways in which work with information shapes forms which we create, its important right away to differentiate between two lines of influence. On the one hand, we may think about how the centrality of dealing with information in our daily lives may affect our aesthetic preferences as manifested in trends in architecture, industrial design, graphic design, media design, cinema, music, fashion, theatre, dance, exhibition design, and other cultural fields. One the other hand, we also need to remember that most forms we encounter today are designed on computers. And this, of course, is likely to have at least as much of an effect on what forms the designers are going to come with. In summary, information processing acts both as a force outside a form, so to speak (i.e., the new habits of perception, behavior, work, and play) – as well as being the very method through which the forms are being designed. 

There is also another fundamental effect which is worth articulating right here in the introduction. In information society the design of forms becomes intricately linked with the concept of interface. First of all, as I already mentioned above, we need to give some visual form to what will appear on the screens of computers, mobile phones, PDAs, car navigation systems, and other devices – as well as to buttons, trackballs, microphones, and various other input tools. Therefore, human-computer interfaces which involve a set of visual conventions such as folders, icons, and menus (i.e., Graphical User Interface), audio conventions (as in voice recognition interface), and particular material articulations (such as the shape, color, material and texture of a mobile phone) – represent the whole new category of forms which need to be designed today. Even more importantly, as computation becomes incorporated in our lived environment (the trend which is described by such terms as “ubiquitous computing,” “pervasive computing,” “ambient intelligence,” “context-aware environments,” “smart objects”) the interfaces slowly leave the realm where they safely lived for a few decades – that is, stand-alone computers and electronics devices – and start appearing in all kinds of objects and on all kinds of surfaces, be it interior walls, furniture, benches, bags, clothing, posters, and so on. [2] Consequently, the forms of all these objects that previously lived “outside of information” have now address the likely presence of interfaces somewhere on them.

This does not mean that from now on “form follows interface” – rather, the two now have to accommodate each other. Beyond the traditional requirements that the material forms had to satisfy – a chair has to be comfortable for sitting, for example – their design is now also shaped by new requirements. For instance, at least so far, we are used to interact with text which is presented on flat and rectangular, and therefore if a screen is to be incorporated somewhere in the object, a part of it needs to be reasonably flat. Which is easy to do if an object is a table but not as easy if it is a piece of clothing or Gerry’s Disney Hall in Los Angeles specifically designed not to have a single flat area. (Of course, as new technologies such as Rapid Manufacturing may soon enable easy printing of an electronic display on any surface of any object while it is being produced, it’s possible that we will be able to quickly adjust our perceptual habits, so moving and change-shaping display surfaces will be accepted much easier than I can imagine. In fact, the computer-controlled graphic projections on the body of dancers as in _Apparition_ by Klaus Obermaier or in _Interactive Opera Stage_ system by Art+Com already show the aesthetic potential of displaying information over a changing non-flat not-rectangular form, i.e. a human body.) [3]

October 18, 5:04pm – 5:33pm. I am looking at the show of student projects from Department of Industrial Design at Eindhoven Technical University in Netherlands. The department is only three years old, so instead of designing traditional objects, students are working on “smart objects.” Every project in show starts with an everyday familiar object and ads some “magical” functions to it via electronics and computers. Which means that I see more examples of solid objects and media/interface surfaces coming together. In one project, a canopy placed diagonally over a child’s hospital in a bed becomes an electronic canvas. By tracking the position of a special pen that does not need to touch the drawing surface, the canvas allows the child to draw on it without having to move from the bed. In another project, a special mirror allows one person to leave a message for somebody else – for instance, a different member of a household. A rectangular block containing a camera is built into a mirror frame. You take the block out, record a video message and place the block back into the frame. After the video is automatically “loaded” into the magical mirror, a small picture appears somewhere on the mirror surface: when you click on the picture it plays a video message. Yet another project adds magical interactivity to a vertical plastic column. The lights inside the column turn it into an ambient light source. The column is covered with a special interface: a net. Depending on how you touch the net, the position, quality, and tint of the light changes. How exactly the light will change is not directly predictable, and this is what makes the interaction with light column fun. 

Together, these three projects show us different ways in an object, an interface and a display can be put together. The first two projects rely on already familiar behaviors – drawing with a pen or making a recording with a video camera. The last one calls for user to develop new vocabulary of movements and gestures to which the light will respond. And the ways in which a “smart object” talks back to us are also different: a canvas canopy shows a drawing, a mirror plays video, and a light glows in different ways. In short, the surface of an object can become both an output and input media, bringing together the physical and the screen-like – form and information - in surprising ways. There is indeed magic to these “smart objects”: we see familiar normally “passive objects literally coming to life and responding to our interactions with them.

The forms that are discussed in this book are not only material ones (as in design and architecture); they are also ways to structure data to make it meaningful and useful for human users by presenting it on some kind of display. So, a cinematic narrative, an interactive information visualization, a Web search engine, User Interface (UI) of Nokia phones, or Spotlight (a new search / file management tool in MAC OS) are also forms, which organize data, be it audio-visual recordings in the case of a film, or documents on a hard drive the case of Spotlight. To distinguish these kinds of forms from the material forms, I will refer to them as “screen forms” – keeping in mind that the actual displays can also include paper (as in illustrations and graphs which appear in journals), as well as augmented reality displays where information is seen superimposed against the real world.

Since this book is about form and information, I will be focusing on the new screen forms that either offer us fundamentally new ways to manage information or respond to the dramatic increase in its quantity. This last fact may appear trivial: we all know that the amount of data being created every year is growing very fast, that every day there are 15,000 new blogs are created [4]; that... All this is familiar and therefore not very interesting; and yet our daily habits of work and entertainment, the ways in which we understand ourselves, others, and the world around us are being deeply reshaped through this pure quantitative growth of information being produced, exchanged, stored, and made available. 

So, this is another reason why I chose the term “information society” over any other term as a context for this study. I believe that the exponential growth of information available to us is one of main pressure points on contemporary culture and this pressure will only continue to increase. The cultural effects of this information glut are diverse, and I investigate some of them in part three of this book. By situating my investigation within the context of “information society” I want to highlight new cultural dimension that so far has not been part of our critical vocabulary: scale. In other words, while normally we think of culture using qualitatively different categories such as authorship, collaboration, reception, media type, ideology, and so on, we also now need to start considering something purely quantitative: _the dramatic increase in the scale of media available_. We no longer deal with “old media” or “new media” – we now have to think through what it means to be living with “more media.”

Some effects of this quantitative change are already visible. Our new standard interface to culture is a search engine. Although we have now completely used to this, imagine if somebody was to tell you in the early 1990s that soon you will be searching first through millions of documents, and only then listening, watching, or reading. A related development is the shift from a single media object that physically existed as an object and was appreciated in isolation – to a sequence or a database of digital media. For instance, rather than fetishizing a particular physical music record or a particular photographic print, we deal with music playlists or catalogs of digital photographs. 

But what do these effects means? Has the increase in scale of available media and new tools and conventions used to access it led to the new aesthetics in works themselves and new patterns of reception? These kinds of question are much harder to answer. I don’t have these answers; instead in the third part of the book I discuss some new cultural practices and even new fields which all address this exponential growth of quantity of information in creative ways. 

I see this growth of information not as a cultural threat but as a cultural opportunity. New cultural strategies are often invented as a response to a real social crisis or simply a perceived change in social order. The industrialization of the nineteenth century provoked a number of creative responses such Art Nouveau and Arts and Crafts movement. World War I and revolutionary fever in Europe led to Constructivism, development of Russian montage school in cinema and photomontage, Surrealism, etc. Today “informationalization” puts pressure on society to invent new ways to interact with information, new ways to make sense of it, and new ways to represent it. Social software such as Wikipedia, work in information visualization and information design such as the projects by Benjamin Fry, exceptional database narratives such as _Bleeding Through: Layers of Los Angeles_ by Norman Klein, Rosemary Camella and Andreas Kratky, and cultural analysis such as _Rhythm Science_ by DJ Spooky are all examples of approaching new information environment creatively. Instead of trying to defend ourselves against information glut, we need to approach this situation as the opportunity to invent new forms appropriate for our world. In short, _we need to invent info-aesthetics_. 

## References:

[1] Therefore, although the word “information” contains the world “form” inside it, in reality it’s the other way around – information always has to be wrapped up in some external form in order to be useful to us.

[2] Takashi Hoshimo reports that “Posters in Japan are being embedded with tag readers that receive signals from the user’s ‘ID’ tag and send relevant information and free products back.” Takashi Hoshimo, “Bloom Time Out East,” _ME: Mobile Entertainment_, November 2005, issue 9, p. 25, [www.mobile-ent.biz](www.mobile-ent.biz))

[3] Apparition. Choreographer: Klaus Obermaier. Production: Ars Electronica Future Lab. Presented at Ars Electronica 2004 festival.

[4] Data for October 2005.

---