---
title: 'What Comes After Remix?'
author: 'Lev Manovich'
year: 2007
type: fulltext
---

# What Comes After Remix?

In 2000s the production of news, media, information, and knowledge underwent many important changes. One of the key changes is the widespread adoption of remix by producers and consumers alike. In parallel, a more capacious set of terms was introduced to characterize complex movements of content between people, locations, and devices. “Remix” is one of these new terms; others are “publish”, “upload”, “rip”, “share”, and “mix”.

If remix is defined as the production of any new content which combines elements from different sources – be they different online journals, web portals, news organizations, blogs, etc. – remix can be said to have become an intrinsic part of news communication on the Web. On the consumption side, RSS software allows anybody to curate their own news sources, with millions of web sites and blogs to choose from. The user can also select when and where to view her news – a phenomenon that has come to be known as “timeshifting” and “placeshifting”. On the production side, remix has been adopted as well. For instance, Google News algorithmically generates news, remixing material gathered from thousands of news publications. (Interestingly, there is no information on the Google News web site about the algorithm used, so we know nothing about its selection criteria or what counts as important and relevant news.) Another kind of “algorithmic remix” is performed by the web-art application [10x10](http://www.marcosweskamp.com/), designed and developed by Jonathan Harris, which presents a grid of news images based on the algorithmic analysis of news feeds from _The New York Times_, the BBC, and Reuters. [1]

It’s also possible to think of the so-called “user-generated content” (UGC) [2] as a set of varied remix operations. Firstly, the bloggers who commonly republish materials from other sources, adding their own comments, can be said to create a particular kind of remix. In these cases, the modification of the original content common to all remixes takes the form of commentary. Secondly, a significant part of user-generated content available online is actually the result of users remixing material produced by professionals. For instance, the popular genre of anime music videos involves creatively combining music ripped from professional music videos and pieces of anime edited together. Thirdly, in terms of its structure, a typical personal blog represents a remix of material drawn from other sources and assembled on one site; this remix is available to others creating their own remixes. (In regard to this, it is important that blog software allows for the modularity of each post – facilitating its reuse in other blogs. The same goes for other Web technologies such as “permalink” and the addition of “share” buttons to media content on social media sites such as YouTube. The availability of these tools around each piece of media content gives strong encouragement to users to include this content in their own remixes.) 

Having described some of the news communication practices on the Web in the 2000s that involve remix, I now want to place “remix epistemology” (the generation of knowledge about the world either for personal use or for that of other people by selecting and combining from the numerous sources available) within the wider phenomenon of “remix culture”. 

As the user-generated media content (video, photos, music) on the Web exploded around 2005-2006 an important semantic switch took place. The term “remix” (or “mix”) tended to be used in contexts where previously the term “editing” had been standard – for instance, when referring to a user editing a video. (Thus, when in the spring of 2007 Adobe released video editing software for users of the popular media sharing web site Photobucket, it named the software Remix. The software was a stripped-down version of one of the earliest video editing softwares for PCs called Premiere.) [3]

Today, many cultural and lifestyle arenas – music, fashion, design, art, Web applications, user created media, food – are mediated by remixes, fusions, collages, or mash-ups. If post-modernism defined the 1980s, remix definitely dominates the 2000s, and looks set to remain hegemonic over the next decade as well. (For an expanding resource on remix culture, visit remixtheory.net by Eduardo Navas.) Here are just a few examples of how remix continues to expand. For his 2004/2005-winter collection, John Galliano (a fashion designer for the House of Dior) mixed the vagabond look, Yemenite traditions, East European motifs, and other elements collected on his far-reaching travels. DJ Spooky created a feature-length remix of D.W. Griffith's 1912 _Birth of a Nation_ which he appropriately named _Rebirth of a Nation_. In April 2006, the Annenberg Center at the University of Southern California ran a two-day conference on “Networked Politics” that featured sessions on and presentations of a variety of remix cultures on the Web: political remix videos, anime music videos, machinima, alternative news, infrastructure hacks. [4] In addition to these cultures, which remix media content, there is a growing number of software applications that remix data – so-called software “mash-ups”. Wikipedia defines a mash-up as “a website or application that combines content from more than one source into an integrated experience.” [5] At  the time of writing (July 29, 2007), the web site [www.programmableweb.com](http://www.programmableweb.com/) lists a total of 2150 mash-ups, and it estimates that an average of 3.45 new mash-up Web applications are being published every day. [6]

Remix practice extends beyond culture and the Internet. _Wired_ magazine devoted its July 2005 issue to the theme Remix Planet. The introduction boldly stated: “From _Kill Bill_ to Gorillaz, from custom Nikes to _Pimp My Ride_, this is the age of the remix.” [7] Another of the world’s top IT trend watchers – the annual O’Reilly Emerging Technology Conferences (ETech) – similarly adopted remix as the theme for its 2005 conference. Attending the conference, I watched in amazement as top executives from Microsoft, Yahoo, Amazon, and other IT companies, not exactly known for their avant-garde aspirations, described their recent technologies and research projects by reference to remixing. If I had any doubts that we are living not simply in a Remix Culture but in a Remix Era, they evaporated totally at that conference.

Originally, “remixing” had a precise, narrow meaning. Gradually, its meaning became more diffuse. Although there were earlier precursors, it was through the introduction of multi-track mixers that remixing became a standard practice. With each element of a song – vocals, drums, etc. – available for individual manipulation, it became possible to “remix” the song: change the volume of some tracks or substitute new tracks for the old ones. Over time the term broadened, so that today it refers to any reworking of already existing cultural work(s). 

In his book _DJ Culture_, Ulf Poschardt identifies different stages in the evolution of remixing practice. In 1972 DJ Tom Moulton made his first disco remixes; as Poschardt points out, they “show a very chaste treatment of the original song. Moulton sought above all a different weighting of the various soundtracks, and worked the rhythmic elements of the disco songs even more clearly and powerfully…Moulton used the various elements of the sixteen or twenty-four track master tapes and remixed them.” [8] By 1987, “DJs started to ask other DJs for remixes” and the treatment of the original material became much more aggressive. For example, “Coldcut used the vocals from Ofra Hanza’s ‘Im Nin Alu’ and contrasted Rakim’s ultra-deep bass voice with her provocatively feminine voice. To this were added techno sounds and a house-inspired remix of a rhythm section that loosened the heavy, sliding beat of the rap piece, making it sound lighter and brighter.” [9]

Around the turn of the new millennium, people started to apply the term “remix” to other media besides music: visual projects, software, literary texts. Since, in my view, electronic music and software serve as the two key reservoirs of new metaphors for the rest of the culture today, this expansion of the term is understandable; one can only wonder why it did not happen earlier. Yet we are left with an interesting paradox: while in the realm of commercial music remixing is officially accepted, [10] in other cultural sectors it is seen as violation of copyright and hence as theft. So, while filmmakers, visual artists, photographers, architects and Web designers routinely remix already existing works, this is not openly acknowledged, and no proper terms equivalent to remixing in music exist to describe these practices.

One term that is sometimes used to talk about these practices in non-music areas is “appropriation”. The term was first used to refer to certain New York-based post-modern artists of the early 1980s who reworked older photographic images – [Sherrie Levine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sherrie_Levine), Richard Prince, Barbara Kruger, and others. But the term “appropriation” never really caught on as “remixing” did. In fact, in contrast to “remix”, “appropriation” never quite transcended the original art world context in which it was coined. I think that “remixing” is a better term anyway, because it suggests the systematic reworking of a source, a meaning “appropriation” does not have. And indeed, the original “appropriation artists”, such as Richard Prince for example, simply copied the existing image in its entirety rather than remixing it. As with Duchamp’s famous urinal, the aesthetic effect derives from the transfer of a cultural sign from one sphere to another, rather than from any modification of it.

The other older term commonly used across the media is “quoting”, which I see it as describing a very different logic than remixing. If remixing implies systematically rearranging the whole text, quoting refers to the insertion of fragments from old text(s) into the new one. Thus, I don’t think we should see quoting as a historical precedent for remixing. Rather, we might think of it as a precedent for another new authorial practice which, like remixing, was made possible by electronic and digital technology – sampling. 

Music critic Andrew Goodwin defined sampling as “the uninhibited use of digital sound recording as a central element of composition. Sampling thus becomes an aesthetic program.” [11] We might say that with sampling technology, the practices of montage and collage that were always central to twentieth century culture, became industrialized. Yet we should be careful in applying the old terms to new technology driven cultural practices. The terms “montage” and “collage” pop up regularly in the writings of music theorists from Poschardt to Kodwo Eshun and DJ Spooky, who in 2004 published the brilliant book _Rhythm Science_. Ending up on a number of “best 10 books of 2004” lists, it proclaimed “unlimited remix” as _the_ artistic and political technique of our time. [12] In my view, the terms that have come down to us from the literary and visual modernism of the early twentieth century – think, for instance, of works by Moholy-Nagy, Hannah Höch or Raoul Hausmann – do not always adequately describe the new electronic music. Let us note just three differences. Firstly, musical samples are often arranged in loops. Secondly, the nature of sound allows musicians to mix existing sounds in a variety of ways, from clearly differentiating and contrasting individual samples (thus following the traditional modernist aesthetics of montage/collage), to melding them into an organic and coherent whole; borrowing terms used by Roland Barthes, we might say that if modernist collages always involved a “clash” of elements, electronic and software collages also accommodate a “blend”. [13] Thirdly, electronic musicians often take it for granted that their works will be remixed, sampled, taken apart and modified. 

It’s worth noting here that the revolution in electronic pop music that took place in the second part of the 1980s was paralleled by similar developments in the visual pop culture. The introduction of electronic editing equipment such as the switcher, keyer, paintbox, and image store made remixing and sampling a common practice in video production towards the end of the decade; while first pioneered in music videos, it came later to be used across the board in television. Other software tools such as Photoshop (1989) and After Effects (1993) had the same impact in the fields of graphic design, motion graphics, commercial illustration and photography. And, a few years later, the World Wide Web redefined an electronic document as a mix of other documents. Remix culture had arrived.

The question that at this point is really hard to answer is what comes after remix? Will we eventually get tired of cultural objects – be they dresses by Alexander McQueen, motion graphics by MK12 or songs by Aphex Twin – made from samples which come from the already existing database of culture? And if we do, is it even conceivable that we shall be able to create a new aesthetics that does not rely on copious sampling? When I emigrated from Russia to the U.S. in 1981, moving from a grey and red Communist Moscow to a vibrant and post-modern New York, I, along with others living in Russia, felt that the Communist regime would endure for at least another 300 years. But just ten years later, the Soviet Union no longer existed. Similarly, in the middle of the 1990s the euphoria unleashed by the Web, the collapse of Communist governments in Eastern Europe and early effects of globalization created the impression that we had finally left the Cold War culture behind – its heavily armed borders, massive spying, and the military-industrial complex. And now once again, only ten years on, we seem to find ourselves cast back into the darkest years of Cold War era, except that now we are being tracked with RFID chips, computer vision surveillance systems, data mining and the other new technologies of the twenty-first century. So, it is very possible that the remix culture, which right now appears to be so firmly entrenched as to resist challenges from any other cultural logic, will morph into something else sooner than we think. 

I don’t know what comes after remix. But if we apply our efforts to getting a grip – historically and theoretically – on the current remix era, we will be in a better position to recognize and understand whatever new era replaces it. 

## References:

[1] [www.tenbyten.org](http://www.tenbyten.org/), accessed July 29, 2007.

[2] A glance at the history of the Wikipedia page on “User-generated content” reveals that it was first created on January 28, 2006. According to the version of the article accessed at the time of writing (July 23, 2007), “[t]he term entered mainstream usage during 2005 after arising in web publishing and [new media](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_media) content production circles. It reflects the expansion of media production through new technologies that are accessible and affordable to the general public. These include [digital video](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_video), [blogging](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blogging), [podcasting](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Podcasting), mobile phone photography and wikis.” [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User-generated\_content](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User-generated_content), accessed July 23, 2007.

[3] [http://www.webware.com/8301-1\_109-9689909-2.html](http://www.webware.com/8301-1\_109-9689909-2.html), accessed July 29, 2007.

[4] [http://netpublics.annenberg.edu/](http://netpublics.annenberg.edu/), accessed February 4, 2007.

[5] [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mashup_%28web\_application\_hybrid%29](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mashup_(web\_application\_hybrid)), accessed February 4, 2007.

[6] [http://www.programmableweb.com/mashups](http://www.programmableweb.com/mashups), accessed July 29, 2007.

[7] [http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/13.07/intro.html](http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/13.07/intro.html), accessed February 4, 2007.

[8] Ulf Poschardt, _DJ Culture_, trans. Shaun Whiteside (London: Quartet Books Ltd, 1998), 123.

[9] Ibid. 271.

[10] For instance, Web users are invited to remix Madonna songs at [http://madonna.acidplanet.com/default.asp?subsection=madonna](http://madonna.acidplanet.com/default.asp?subsection=madonna).

[11] Ibid. 280.

[12] Paul D. Miller aka Dj Spooky that Subliminal Kid. _Rhythm Science_. MIT Press, 2004.

[13] Roland Barthes, _Image, Music, Text_, translated by Stephen Heath (New York: Hill and Wang, 1977), 146.

---